README.md, before:

# ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale

This took heavy inspriration from [city96/SD-Latent-Upscaler](https://github.com/city96/SD-Latent-Upscaler) and [Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale](https://github.com/Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale). Directly upscaling inside the latent space. 
Model was trained for SD1.5 and drawn content. Might add new architectures or update models at some point.

![comparison](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/3b0b8a99-9515-4405-8d8b-fc285bb2fdd4)

First row is upscaled rgb image from rgb models before being used in vae encode or vae decoded image for latent models, second row final output after second KSampler.

## Training Details
I tried to take promising networks from already existing papers and apply more exotic loss functions. The final [DAT](https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/DAT) model used a 4-channel 
[EfficientnetV2-b0](https://github.com/huggingface/pytorch-image-models/blob/main/timm/models/efficientnet.py) as a discriminator, [Prodigy optimizer](https://pytorch-optimizers.readthedocs.io/en/latest/optimizer/#pytorch_optimizer.Prodigy)
with 0.1, bf16, L1 loss with a factor of 0.08 and batch size 32 for the normal model and 16 for the large model. Training takes around 22-24gb vram and was done on a 4090. I did not try 
vae decode inside training a lot, but if someone wants to train with it, use `torch.inference_mode()` to drastically reduce vram usage since vae does not get trained anyway. After training 
with a discriminator and l1, I applied [contextual loss](https://github.com/styler00dollar/Colab-traiNNer/blob/a8d97b4826c01d7b206e7a320156d8666db1efd2/code/loss/loss.py#L715) which used 
a self-made 4-channel latent classification network as a feature extractor. Training with contextual loss from scratch takes too long to converge, so I only used it at the very end.

Similar settings got applied to [CRAFT](https://github.com/AVC2-UESTC/CRAFT-SR) and I trained with batch size 16. I did not finetune CRAFT with contextual loss yet.

### Further Ideas
Ideas I might test in the future:
- MSE
- Huber
- Different Conv2D (for example MBConv)
- Dropout prior to final conv

### Failure cases
- 4 channel ssim on output latents. Only remains as positive loss if `nonnegative_ssim=True` gets set in `pytorch_msssim`, but model does not seem to train properly then.
- Using `vae.config.scaling_factor = 0.13025` (do not set a scaling factor, [nnlatent used it](https://github.com/Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale/blob/08105da31dbd7a54569661e135835e73bd8064b0/latent_resizer_train.py#L248) and city96 didn't, I do not recommend to use it), image range 0 to 1 (image tensor is supposed to be -1 to 1 prior to encoding with vae) and not using `torch.inference_mode()` while creating the dataset. A combination of these can make training a lot less stable, even if loss goes down during training and does seemingly converge, the final model won't be able to generate properly. Here is a correct example:
```python
vae = AutoencoderKL.from_single_file("vae.pt").to(device)
vae.eval()

with torch.inference_mode():
  image = cv2.imread(f)
  image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
  image = (
      torch.from_numpy(image.transpose(2, 0, 1))
      .float()
      .unsqueeze(0)
      .to(device)
      / 255.0
  )
  image = vae.encode(image*2.0-1.0).latent_dist.sample()
```
- [DITN](https://github.com/yongliuy/DITN) and [OmniSR](https://github.com/Francis0625/Omni-SR) looked like liquid with their official sizes. Not recommended to use small or efficient networks.

- [HAT](https://github.com/XPixelGroup/HAT) looked promising, but seemingly always had some kind of blur effect. I didn't manage to get a proper model yet.

![hat](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/d30ecd0a-b1be-4588-9155-7bddaa5d47bc)

- I tried to use [fourier](https://github.com/advimman/lama/blob/d4239d84c0e1040aabf7a95e3dc85cf728dfc9f4/saicinpainting/training/modules/ffc.py#L49) as first and last conv in DAT, but I didn't manage to properly train it yet. Making the loss converge seems hard.

![fourier](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/cabc7ad5-f577-45fc-9086-0fccd009b777)

- [GRL](https://github.com/ofsoundof/GRL-Image-Restoration) did not converge.
  
 ![grl](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/3ceba02f-2f0d-4872-8fc3-fc930785658a)

Commit message:

adding SwinFIR comparison, adding SwinFIR Prodigy failure info

README.md, after:

# ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale

This took heavy inspriration from [city96/SD-Latent-Upscaler](https://github.com/city96/SD-Latent-Upscaler) and [Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale](https://github.com/Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale). Directly upscaling inside the latent space. 
Model was trained for SD1.5 and drawn content. Might add new architectures or update models at some point.

![comparison](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/9bae2125-9ffd-482c-aca5-023ab1e304b4)

First row is upscaled rgb image from rgb models before being used in vae encode or vae decoded image for latent models, second row final output after second KSampler.

## Training Details
I tried to take promising networks from already existing papers and apply more exotic loss functions. The final [DAT](https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/DAT) model used a 4-channel 
[EfficientnetV2-b0](https://github.com/huggingface/pytorch-image-models/blob/main/timm/models/efficientnet.py) as a discriminator, [Prodigy optimizer](https://pytorch-optimizers.readthedocs.io/en/latest/optimizer/#pytorch_optimizer.Prodigy)
with 0.1, bf16, L1 loss with a factor of 0.08 and batch size 32 for the normal model and 16 for the large model. Training takes around 22-24gb vram and was done on a 4090. I did not try 
vae decode inside training a lot, but if someone wants to train with it, use `torch.inference_mode()` to drastically reduce vram usage since vae does not get trained anyway. After training 
with a discriminator and l1, I applied [contextual loss](https://github.com/styler00dollar/Colab-traiNNer/blob/a8d97b4826c01d7b206e7a320156d8666db1efd2/code/loss/loss.py#L715) which used 
a self-made 4-channel latent classification network as a feature extractor. Training with contextual loss from scratch takes too long to converge, so I only used it at the very end.

Similar settings got applied to [CRAFT](https://github.com/AVC2-UESTC/CRAFT-SR) and I trained with batch size 16. I did not finetune CRAFT with contextual loss yet.

### Further Ideas
Ideas I might test in the future:
- MSE
- Huber
- Different Conv2D (for example MBConv)
- Dropout prior to final conv

### Failure cases
- 4 channel ssim on output latents. Only remains as positive loss if `nonnegative_ssim=True` gets set in `pytorch_msssim`, but model does not seem to train properly then.
- Using `vae.config.scaling_factor = 0.13025` (do not set a scaling factor, [nnlatent used it](https://github.com/Ttl/ComfyUi_NNLatentUpscale/blob/08105da31dbd7a54569661e135835e73bd8064b0/latent_resizer_train.py#L248) and city96 didn't, I do not recommend to use it), image range 0 to 1 (image tensor is supposed to be -1 to 1 prior to encoding with vae) and not using `torch.inference_mode()` while creating the dataset. A combination of these can make training a lot less stable, even if loss goes down during training and does seemingly converge, the final model won't be able to generate properly. Here is a correct example:
```python
vae = AutoencoderKL.from_single_file("vae.pt").to(device)
vae.eval()

with torch.inference_mode():
  image = cv2.imread(f)
  image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
  image = (
      torch.from_numpy(image.transpose(2, 0, 1))
      .float()
      .unsqueeze(0)
      .to(device)
      / 255.0
  )
  image = vae.encode(image*2.0-1.0).latent_dist.sample()
```
- [DITN](https://github.com/yongliuy/DITN) and [OmniSR](https://github.com/Francis0625/Omni-SR) looked like liquid with their official sizes. Not recommended to use small or efficient networks.

- [HAT](https://github.com/XPixelGroup/HAT) looked promising, but seemingly always had some kind of blur effect. I didn't manage to get a proper model yet.

![hat](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/d30ecd0a-b1be-4588-9155-7bddaa5d47bc)

- I tried to use [fourier](https://github.com/advimman/lama/blob/d4239d84c0e1040aabf7a95e3dc85cf728dfc9f4/saicinpainting/training/modules/ffc.py#L49) as first and last conv in DAT, but I didn't manage to properly train it yet. Making the loss converge seems hard.

![fourier](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/cabc7ad5-f577-45fc-9086-0fccd009b777)

- [GRL](https://github.com/ofsoundof/GRL-Image-Restoration) did not converge.
  
 ![grl](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/3ceba02f-2f0d-4872-8fc3-fc930785658a)

- SwinFIR with Prodigy 1 and Prodigy 0.1 caused massive instability. Images from my Prodigy 1, l1 and EfficientnetV2-b0 attempt.

![graphs](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/957aff0b-8670-471e-8f10-4231426a87c2)

![swinfir_prodigy](https://github.com/styler00dollar/ComfyUI-sudo-latent-upscale/assets/51405565/5c010b34-3b6e-4188-a561-e013bd52f185)
